An Examination of Conscience

SINS AGAINST THE TEN COMMANDMENTS

Sins Against The First Commandment

    Have you doubted in matters of faith? Consulted
    fortune-tellers? Believed in dreams? Made use of superstitious
    practices? Gone to places of false worship and taken an active part
    in the religious services of a false church? Belonged to Masons,
    Communists, of some other forbidden society? Read anti-Catholic
    books or papers? Neglected religious instruction? Omitted religious
    duties through fear or ridicule? Murmured against God, or despaired
    of His mercy? Have you rashly presumed on His goodness in committing
    sin? Did you pray in time of temptation? For your family? Have
    you neglected your daily prayers? Have you recited them carelessly,
    without devotion, thoughtlessly? Have you missed spending a reasonable
    amount of time in thanksgiving after Holy Communion? Have you been
    irreverent toward God, sacred persons, places or things? Have you
    associated with people who might have a bad influence upon your
    life? Have you refused to place signs of faith in your home, such
    as a crucifix, picture of the Blessed Mother or the saints?

Sins Against The Second Commandment

    Have you taken the name of God in vain? Laughed at the profane use
    of the name of God or irreverent speech by others? Given bad example
    to children by such speech in their presence, or by neglecting to
    correct a child when irreverent or profane language was used? Spoken
    disrespectfully of the saints or holy things? Allowed others in your
    household to do the same? Sworn falsely, that is, called upon God to
    witness the truth of what you were saying, when you were in reality
    telling a lie? Sworn rashly, or in slight and trivial matters? Have
    you cursed persons, animals, or things? Have you blasphemed, that is,
    used insulting language expressing contempt for God, His saints or
    sacred things? Have you caused others to do so? Have you criticized
    God's mercy or justice, or murmured against His providence?

Sins Against The Third Commandment

    Have you assisted at Mass on Sundays and Holydays? Have you been
    late for Mass? Behaved properly in Church? Have you performed or
    commanded unnecessary servile work, bought or sold without necessity,
    or in any other way - gambling, drinking - profaned these holy days?

Sins Against The Fourth Commandment

    Have you shown due honor, love, gratitude and obedience to your
    parents? Have you shown due honor and obedience to your pastors
    and other lawful superiors? Have you asked their pardon when you
    hurt them? Have you been disrespectful to your parents by speaking
    angrily to them, saying unkind, harsh words to them and about them,
    or by being ashamed of them? If you are a parent, have you shown this
    lack of honor, love and gratitude to your parents in the presence of
    your children? Have you criticized them and rejected some of their
    orders? Have you corrected and punished your children for serious
    transgressions, or forbidden them to enter serious occasions of
    sin? Have you cooperated with teachers in the education of your
    children? Have you refused to send your children to Catholic school
    when you could have done so and had no permission from bishop or
    pastor to do otherwise? If there is no Catholic school in your
    vicinity, have you sent your children to catechism faithfully? Have
    you taken an interest in their catechism lessons? Have you cooperated
    with the Pastor and the Sisters in the projects sponsored by
    them to stimulate the children's interest in the faith? Have you
    trained and corrected your children in regard to chastity? Have you
    been disrespectful to aged persons? Have you had proper care for
    children and those dependent on you - both in physical and religious
    matters? Above all, have you given them a good example? If you are a
    child, have you refused to speak to your father or mother? Have you
    resented them? Have you disobeyed your parents when they gave you
    orders to avoid bad companions or dangerous occasions to sin? Have
    you obeyed the rules they made concerning persons to be brought into
    the house, the hours to be kept at night, or the conduct within the
    home? When earning money, while living at home or while still subject
    to your parents, have you refused them part of your earnings when
    they needed it or demanded it? As a citizen, have you obeyed laws
    of the city and country made for the safety and well-being of all?

Sins Against The Fifth Commandment

    The fifth commandment forbids: Murder, suicide, criminal neglect
    that might cause serious injury or death to another, serious
    anger and hatred, abortion, mercy killing, the use of narcotics,
    sterilization, drunkenness, help extended to another to commit a
    mortal sin, fighting, anger, hatred and revenge.  Have you procured,
    desired, or hastened the death of any one? Have you been guilty
    of anger, hatred, quarreling, revenge? Used provoking language,
    insulting words, ridicule? Refused to speak to others? Caused
    enmities? Given scandal? Did you eat or drink too much? Have you
    been unkind, irritable, impatient? Have you provoked others to
    anger offended them, hurt them by anger or impatience? Have you
    entertained thoughts of jealousy, revenge, aversion, resentment or
    contempt of others? Have you kept company with those who drink to
    excess? Have you encouraged them to drink? Have you jested about
    their drunkenness? Have you neglected your health or endangered your
    life? Have you neglected to take care of the health of your children
    or those subject to you? Have you endangered the life of others by
    driving an automobile while intoxicated or caused real danger to
    the safety of others in any other way?

Sins Against The Sixth and Ninth Commandments

    These two commandments demand purity and modesty in our life: in
    our thoughts, words, and actions, whether alone or with others.
    In general, these commandments forbid: adultery, fornication,
    self-abuse, indecent dressing, necking, impure kisses, impure dancing,
    impure talk, sins against nature, birth control, impure touches,
    petting, looking at impure pictures, dances, floor shows, movies, or
    reading impure books or magazines.  Have you been guilty of impure or
    immodest thoughts, words or actions - alone or with others? Have you
    spoken words or phrases of double meaning? Have you told suggestive
    stories? Have you encouraged others to do so? Have you taught others
    to do this? Have you avoided occasions of sin in this matter? Have you
    guarded your sight, or allowed your eyes to wander in curiosity over
    obviously dangerous objects? Have you put yourself in an occasion of
    sin by reading bad books, looking at indecent pictures, keeping bad
    company, attending immoral performances, viewing indecent movies,
    television programs or internet sites, singing lewd songs, and
    the like? Have you distributed obscene books or magazines? Have you
    informed others of places of distribution? Have you encouraged others
    to read them? Have you desired to do impure things? Have you been an
    occasion of sin to others, by your conversation, dress, appearance,
    or actions? Have you touched yourself impurely? If you are married,
    have you committed sins of impurity with another married or single
    person? Taken part in prolonged kisses and embraces with others
    beside your partner in marriage? Have you used contraceptive means
    in performing marriage duties? Have you, without good reason, refused
    or neglected to render the marriage obligation when seriously asked?

Sins Against The Seventh and Tenth Commandments

    These commandments forbid: robbery and burglary, graft, bribes,
    stealing and damaging the property of others. These commandments
    forbid not merely stealing but every type of dishonest dealing, such
    as, cheating, unjust keeping of what belongs to others, unjust damage
    to property of others, graft on the part of public officials. These
    commandments are also violated by merchants who use false weights,
    measures, who make exorbitant profits or lie about the essential
    qualities of their goods; by those who obtain money from others by
    persuading them to make unsound investments with the assurance of
    gain; by those who knowingly pass counterfeit money, or take undue
    advantage of the ignorance or necessity of another; by employers
    who defraud laborers; by employees who waste time during working
    hours, perform careless work or neglect to take reasonable care of
    the property of their employers; by employers who charge customers
    exorbitant prices; by those who do not return what they borrowed;
    by running up a charge account and not paying it; not returning found
    articles; selling articles with hidden defects for the usual price;
    not paying one's bills; by depriving one's family of necessities by
    gambling, drinking or foolish spending.  Have you stolen or retained
    ill-gotten goods? Damaged or wasted the property of others? Accepted
    bribes? Neglected to make restitution, or to help the poor? Have you
    desired the goods of others? Squandered their goods? As a parent,
    have you taught your children a strict sense of honesty and justice,
    punishing any slight theft or deceit? Have you sinned in any way
    mentioned above?

Sins Against The Eighth Commandment

    This commandment forbids: lies, calumny, detraction, perjury,
    unjust and unnecessary criticism, fault-finding, gossip, backbiting,
    insults, rash judgment, the telling of secrets one is bound to keep,
    cheating, tale-bearing.  Have you borne false witness for or against
    another? Been guilty of detraction, flattery, hypocrisy, lying, rash
    judgment?  Have you entertained unkind thoughts of others? Have you
    harbored suspicions, nursed resentments, refused to forgive others
    when they expressed their contrition? Have you spread unkind remarks
    others make to you? Do you discuss the faults of your parents, wife,
    husband, children with others who have no business knowing anything
    about them? At home are you given to nagging, complaining, arguing,
    refusing to talk, calling names, petty quarreling?  Have you brought
    any harm to your neighbor and have you tried to repair it, as far as
    you were able? Have you tried to destroy the good work performed by
    another, or to hinder it seriously? Have you been sensitive, hurt,
    cool, thoughtless with others?

SINS AGAINST THE PRECEPTS OF THE CHURCH

    I. Have you observed all Sundays and Holydays as commanded by
    the Church?

    II. Have you kept the fast? Eaten meat on prohibited days? Encouraged
    others to violate the precepts of the Church? Scandalized others by
    your failure to obey the Church in this matter?

    III. Have you gone to confession at least once a year? Received Holy
    Communion during Easter Time?

    IV. Are you a member of any forbidden society? Are you a Communist?

    V. Have you contributed to the support of the Church, school,
    pastor? Have you prevented others from fulfilling this
    obligation? Have you fomented rebellion against proper Church
    authority? Have you given bad example to your children by refusing
    to support the Church? Have you tried to teach your children to give
    their share for the support of the Church? Have you ridiculed those
    who are doing their share and often times more than their share for
    the support of the Church?

    VI. Have you married contrary to the laws of the Catholic Church,
    or aided others in doing so? Are you keeping such company that
    may some day prove dangerous for you and lead you to a violation
    of this precept of the Church? Are you encouraging others to keep
    such company?

OBLIGATIONS OF ONE'S STATE IN LIFE

Duties of Children

    Have you disobeyed your parents? Have you caused them to
    be angry? Have you grieved them? Used insulting language to
    them? Kept or wasted your wages you should have given them for
    their support? Incited your brothers and sisters or others against
    them? Neglected to write them or send them help? Neglected them in
    sickness and death?

Duties of Husbands

    Have you grieved or abused your wife; or accused her wrongfully? Have
    you neglected to provide for your family? Given your children bad
    example? Failed to correct their faults? Have you interfered with
    their religious vocation?

Duties of Wives

    Have you disobeyed your husband? Caused your children to disobey
    and dishonor him? Spoken of his faults to your children or
    neighbors? Neglected to correct your children? Have you given them
    bad example? Have you instructed them in their religion? Have you
    interfered with their religious vocation?
